[Music]
see travel is safer today than at any
point in history but that doesn't mean
some people don't get cold feet when it
comes to getting their feet wet everyone
can name at least one famous shipwreck
and some would rather keep their feet on
solid ground rather than risk a stay in
Davy Jones locker
but how worried should we be could a
Titanic like disaster happen today well
strap on your life jackets and man the
lifeboats because you're about to find
out not that your ship is about to sink
or anything I don't want to panic anyone
watching this from the middle of the
Atlantic speaking of that let me know in
the comments section which cruise
destination you'd most like to visit did
anyone else hear splashing it it was
probably nothing before we can answer
our main question we need to know what
led to the sinking of the Titanic
becoming one of the worst maritime
disasters in history
everyone knows the basic story the ship
hit an iceberg there weren't enough
lifeboats and Rose had the necklace the
whole time
Oh with that a spoiler sorry ignoring
the exploits of fictional characters all
of that is basically correct but missing
a few key details the first big issue
contributing to the ship's demise had to
do with the culture of early 20th
century ocean liners the captains of
these ships were under constant pressure
to keep a tight schedule of arrivals and
departures these schedules were
challenging to keep in ideal
circumstances and frequently required
pushing the vessels close to their
limits it's also not clear if the
captain was fully aware of the danger at
the time it was common for the ship's
radio operators to work for a
third-party company relaying messages to
the crew was the second priority
descending private telegrams for the
passengers this went so far as the
Titanic's radio operator telling another
ship to shut up about icebergs because
he had a backlog of private
correspondences additionally it was
widely believed that icebergs didn't
pose any significant danger to ships
in fact a few years earlier a German
liner called the SS chrome Prince
Wilhelm managed to complete its route
after having its bow crumpled by a
collision with an iceberg around that
time
Titanic's future Captain Edward Smith
would dismiss the possibility of a
potential maritime disaster by saying
modern shipbuilding has gone beyond that
hmm
people today mock how the Titanic was
advertised as unsinkable but back then
it barely even counted as a boat
regardless of the reason Captain Smith
chose to continue ahead at full speed he
did have the presence of mind to order
the Titanic's lookouts to watch for rice
but due to a clerical error
they were never given binoculars the
lack of lifeboats was also due to a
misunderstanding of how any potential
collisions would play out and not just
because they would be redundant on an
invincible ship at the time it was
generally accepted that if a ship ever
needed to be abandoned the passengers
and crew would be picked up by another
vessel in the same area no one had ever
anticipated the need to evacuate
everyone on board onto lifeboats that
also helps to explain why the evacuation
was so disorganized with many boats
leaving only partially full well that's
a pretty big oversight the original plan
could have worked if someone had picked
up their distress call in time you see
by 1912 ships weren't yet required to
have someone operating the radio 24/7
this meant that the radio operator of
the SS California the nearest ship and
the one Titanic's operator had told to
shut up was asleep when the distress
calls went out making matters worse was
the fact that the Titanic's radio
operator reported the wrong coordinates
in his SOS this meant that even the
ships that receive the call had trouble
finding where the Titanic had gone down
so those were the main problems facing
the Titanic on that fateful night over
confidence poor communication
insufficient lifeboats and the inability
of rescuers to find her now that we've
established all that it's time to answer
our main
question what if the Titanic disaster
happened today after the Titanic sank
many new procedures were established
with the hope of preventing similar
disasters when of the first was the
establishment of regular ice patrols in
that region of the North Atlantic in the
early days
this meant guys with binoculars freezing
their noses off in boats and planes but
fortunately today is not 100 years ago
another reason today is better than a
century ago is that our iceberg
detection has gotten a lot more
sophisticated the United States Coast
Guard and Canadian ice service regularly
patrol the area with radar-equipped
hc-130 aircraft to scan for any icebergs
coming too close to major shipping
routes with the added assistance of
global positioning satellites and
reports from passing ships the two
agencies can provide daily updates on
the position of icebergs in the North
Atlantic individual vessels also have a
much easier time spotting icebergs in
their vicinity
thanks to technologies such as radar and
sonar becoming commonplace these
advancements have done a great deal to
make sea travel a lot safer
but they aren't foolproof accidents can
still happen so it's a good thing large
vessels are now required to carry enough
lifeboats for everyone on board and the
crews receive training and proper
evacuation procedures modern ships are
also required to have a radio operator
on duty at all times that's good for
several reasons one of them being that
no one wants to be the guy who slept
through a crisis the captain of the
Californian got fired over missing the
Titanic's call and he hadn't even been
breaking any rules emergency radio calls
have been standardized to a greater
extent than they were in 1912
additionally GPS tracking means that if
a ship needs help
responders will know precisely where the
trouble is going down pardon the pun
rescue efforts are also much more
coordinated than they would have been in
the early 20th century the Coast Guard
maintains a variety of emergency
response vehicles ranging from small
boats
helicopters to large ships and planes
they're also better able to coordinate
with and dispatch help from other
civilian and military traffic in the
area so what would a modern-day Titanic
scenario look like well a good example
might be what happened during the 2012
Costa Concordia disaster sure this
shipwreck occurred in the warm waters of
the Mediterranean and the Concordia
struck a rock rather than an iceberg but
the aftermath was similar enough that
some comparisons can be drawn the full
story is as follows the Italian cruise
ship was passing close to the island of
Giglio when it collided with the edge of
an underwater plateau believing he knew
the channel well enough to navigate on
his own the captain had disabled the
collision alarm for the Costa
Concordia's onboard navigation system it
was later revealed that there were
numerous distractions on the ship such
as the presence of the captain's
girlfriend
unlike the Titanic the Concordia had
more than enough lifeboats to get
everyone off safely
unfortunately no amount of policy reform
can completely make up for human error
and poor communication and failure to
follow emergency procedures delayed the
evacuation by more than half an hour by
the time the order to abandon ship had
been given the Costa Concordia was
already beginning to list so severely
that the crew was unable to launch many
of the lifeboats when the surf settled
33 people lost their lives and another
64 had been injured as bad as that was
things could have been much worse since
the location of Concordia's collision
did the passengers and crew a number of
unexpected favors for starters they were
with inside of land when the accident
happened
this meant that help arrived reasonably
quickly once the captain got around to
sending his SOS in fact with the help of
their lifejackets many passengers were
able to swim all the way to solid ground
no one would be swimming very far if
they'd struck an iceberg in the North
Atlantic when the Titanic sank it was
about 400 miles from dry land
and the water was a freezing 28 degrees
the good news is that in the modern
world things might never have gotten to
that point if the Titanic had struck the
iceberg today the Coast Guard would have
deployed a small fleet of boats and
helicopters to assist in the evacuation
not just that but every ship in the area
would have made a beeline for their
coordinates the moment that SOS message
went out with a competent commander
overseeing an organized evacuation this
modern Titanic might not be considered a
disaster at all on the other hand Costa
Concordia shows what can happen when
safety precautions are ignored
now don't let this scare you away from
planning that Caribbean getaway you're
still much more likely to get hurt
driving to work than sailing the seven
seas hey if you learn something new
today then give this video a like and
share with a friend and here are some
other videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and remember
to stay on the bright side of life